FastAPI is a modern, high-performance Python web framework for building APIs.
It is built on top of Starlette for the web layer and Pydantic for data validation.
FastAPI supports async and await natively, making it one of the fastest Python
frameworks available, comparable to Node.js and Go in benchmarks.
FastAPI automatically generates interactive API documentation using Swagger UI
at the /docs endpoint and ReDoc at the /redoc endpoint.

Pydantic is a Python library for data validation using type annotations.
In FastAPI, all request bodies and responses are defined as Pydantic BaseModel
classes. Pydantic v2 is significantly faster than v1 due to its Rust-based core
called pydantic-core. Pydantic validates data at runtime and raises clear errors
for invalid inputs, making APIs safer and more predictable.

Uvicorn is an ASGI web server implementation for Python. It is the recommended
server for running FastAPI applications. Uvicorn uses uvloop and httptools for
extremely fast performance. In production, run Uvicorn with multiple workers:
uvicorn app.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --workers 4

Async programming in Python allows concurrent execution without multiple threads.
The async def keyword defines a coroutine function. The await keyword pauses
execution until an async operation completes. FastAPI uses asyncio under the hood.
Using async endpoints allows FastAPI to handle thousands of concurrent requests
without blocking, which is critical for LLM API services with high latency calls.

Middleware in FastAPI intercepts every request before it reaches the route handler
and every response before it is sent back to the client. Common middleware includes
CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing), logging, authentication, and rate limiting.
The CORSMiddleware allows your API to be called from browser-based frontends.

Lifespan in FastAPI (using asynccontextmanager) replaces the old on_event startup
and shutdown decorators. Code before the yield runs at startup, code after runs
at shutdown. This is the correct way to initialize expensive resources like ML
models, database connections, and FAISS indexes once at startup.

Docker is a platform for containerizing applications. A Dockerfile defines the
steps to build a Docker image. A Docker image is a snapshot of the application
and all its dependencies. A Docker container is a running instance of an image.
Containerization ensures the application runs identically across development,
staging, and production environments, eliminating dependency conflicts.

A Dockerfile for Python applications typically uses python:3.11-slim as base,
installs system dependencies, copies requirements.txt, installs Python packages,
copies application source code, and defines the CMD to run the server.
Multi-stage builds reduce final image size by separating build and runtime stages.

Docker Compose is a tool for defining and running multi-container Docker
applications using a YAML configuration file. In docker-compose.yml you define
services, ports, environment variables, volumes, and health checks.
Volumes persist data between container restarts, which is critical for keeping
FAISS indexes and uploaded documents after a container is restarted.

Environment Variables are key-value pairs used to configure applications
without hardcoding secrets in source code. In Python, the python-dotenv library
reads a .env file and loads its contents as environment variables. Pydantic
Settings reads environment variables automatically using BaseSettings.
Never commit your .env file to Git as it contains API keys and secrets.

Render is a cloud platform for deploying web services. It supports Python,
Node.js, Docker, and static sites. Render provides a free tier for web services
that automatically deploys from a connected GitHub repository on every push.
Render automatically provides HTTPS, custom domains, and health checks.

AWS EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud) is a virtual machine service from Amazon Web
Services. You can deploy Docker containers on EC2 by installing Docker, pulling
your image, and running docker-compose. EC2 gives full control over the server
but requires more manual setup compared to managed platforms like Render.

Health checks are API endpoints that return the current status of the application.
A health check endpoint typically returns HTTP 200 with a JSON body indicating
the service is running, the FAISS index is loaded, and all dependencies are ready.
Health checks are used by Docker, Kubernetes, and cloud platforms to detect
and restart unhealthy service instances automatically.

Logging is the practice of recording events and data during application execution.
Structured JSON logging is preferred in production because logs can be parsed
by monitoring tools like Datadog, CloudWatch, and Grafana. Python's logging
module combined with python-json-logger produces JSON-formatted log lines.
Every log entry should include timestamp, log level, module name, and message.

Caching stores the result of expensive operations so repeated identical requests
can be served instantly. In the RAG API, query responses are cached using an
MD5 hash of the normalized query string as the cache key. TTLCache from the
cachetools library provides an in-memory cache with automatic expiry (TTL).
For production at scale, replace TTLCache with Redis for distributed caching
across multiple API server instances.

Rate Limiting protects APIs from abuse by limiting how many requests a client
can make in a given time window. Common strategies include fixed window,
sliding window, and token bucket algorithms. In FastAPI, rate limiting can be
implemented using the slowapi library or via API gateway services like
AWS API Gateway or Cloudflare.

Security best practices for production APIs include always using HTTPS,
validating all inputs with Pydantic, never exposing raw error messages to clients,
storing secrets in environment variables not in code, using non-root users
inside Docker containers, and implementing authentication using JWT tokens
or API keys for protected endpoints.